Blog running llm d without kubernetes (#333)
llm-d/llm-d.github.io: blog/2026-05-26_running-llm-d-without-kubernetes.md

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/running-llm-d-without-kubernetes/llm-d-platform.drawio.svg" alt="llm-d's EndpointDiscovery module with Kube and File discovery plugins feeding the same router across Kubernetes, Slurm, Ray, and bare metal" style={{width: '85%', height: 'auto', border: '1px solid #888', padding: '4px'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 1: The big picture - one routing stack under every platform. llm-d discovers endpoints through its EndpointDiscovery module (Kube Discovery against an InferencePool, File Discovery against everything else) and serves requests the same way on Kubernetes, Slurm, Ray, or bare metal (inference, HPC, and RL rollout workloads: veRL, SkyRL, prime-rl). The rest of this post explains how.</em></p>
</div>

<!-- truncate -->

> ## The hard problem: routing intelligence trapped on one platform

Reviewer: Presenting the limitations of k8s is expected to motivate the work, but it needs to be balanced with why k8s continues to be the preferred platform outside the few cases where k8s is not ideal to run inference. For example, k8s is currently the undisputed platform for running production inference at scale, including support for day 2 operations such as autoscaling, upgrades and rollouts, observability etc.

Author: Fixed in 3ee2f96 - added:
"None of this is a case against Kubernetes. For production inference at scale it is not just the default but the recommended choice - a mature platform with a strong story for autoscaling, rolling upgrades, observability, and the rest of day-2 operations, which is exactly why llm-d was built on it first. The point is narrower: that same routing intelligence is valuable in environments Kubernetes does not reach, and until now it could not go there"

It is tempting to file "run llm-d off Kubernetes" under simple engineering - drop the cluster dependency, ship a binary, done. The reason it matters is more fundamental than that, and it shows up most sharply in the places llm-d could not previously reach.

> **Reinforcement learning post-training.** Modern RL frameworks for LLMs - veRL, OpenRLHF, SkyRL, NeMo-RL - run on dedicated GPU clusters orchestrated by Ray, Slurm, or bare-metal coordination, where Kubernetes is usually absent and often unwelcome. And in the RL training loop, the rollout phase - running inference to generate the trajectories the policy learns from - is one of the dominant time costs, frequently *the* dominant one. Anything that speeds up that generation directly shortens the loop, which is why inference has become a first-class concern for these frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Reinforcement learning post-training.** Modern RL frameworks for LLMs - veRL, OpenRLHF, SkyRL, NeMo-RL - run on dedicated GPU clusters orchestrated by Ray, Slurm, or bare-metal coordination, where Kubernetes is typically used as a lower level orcehstrator. And in the RL training loop, the rollout phase - running inference to generate the trajectories the policy learns from - is one of the dominant time costs, frequently *the* dominant one. Anything that speeds up that generation directly shortens the loop, which is why inference has become a first-class concern for these frameworks.
```

Reviewer: k8s is often used to run Ray or even Slurm on the cloud.

Author: Fixed in dacb814

**Research labs and HPC.** National labs and supercomputing centers - ORNL, NERSC, ALCF - standardize on Slurm, and not by accident. Security policies restrict privileged containers, and the whole stack is tuned around HPC storage like Lustre and GPFS. For these environments Kubernetes is not merely missing; it is actively undesirable. Slurm already handles scheduling, accounting, and fault tolerance. Adding a Kubernetes control plane buys operational overhead and little else, and so llm-d's routing intelligence was simply out of reach for a large research community.

> **Clean benchmarking.** Measuring what a router is worth requires isolating its contribution. Run llm-d on Kubernetes and the measurement is contaminated by kube-proxy, the CNI, and control-plane interference; a comparison against native vLLM ends up confounding routing intelligence with orchestration overhead. Benchmark efforts that want a clean, infrastructure-neutral baseline could not get one.

Reviewer: Do you have references that support this claim? that k8s negatively impact the performance of llm serving?

Author: Fixed in e60f092

## How llm-d normally discovers endpoints

To see what has to be abstracted, start with how discovery works today. The Endpoint Picker (EPP), the routing engine inside the llm-d router, watches a Kubernetes `InferencePool` object and the pods it selects. As pods come and go, the EPP's internal datastore is updated automatically through the controller-runtime manager.

That machinery requires a live Kubernetes API server, an `InferencePool` CRD, and the RBAC to watch it. On a Slurm allocation or inside a Ray job, none of that exists - and crucially, none of it has anything to do with *how the router scores and picks endpoints*. It is purely about learning which endpoints are out there. That separation is the seam to cut along.

## The EndpointDiscovery abstraction

> So we cut there. The llm-d EPP now defines a general `EndpointDiscovery` plugin interface: anything that can enumerate endpoints and stream upsert/delete events satisfies it - a file on disk, Consul, etcd, a cloud provider's service-discovery API, or the Kubernetes watch itself.

Reviewer: The first sentence "So we cut there" read a bit odd, but may that is just me.

Author: Fixed in b86d830

  <img src="/img/blogs/running-llm-d-without-kubernetes/ray-endpoint-generator.svg" alt="Endpoint generator script connected to the Ray head node, writing endpoints.yaml" style={{width: '75%', height: 'auto', border: '1px solid #888', padding: '4px'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 3: An endpoint generator queries the Ray head node and writes endpoints.yaml.</em></p>
</div>

These patterns all keep a file in the loop. For the most dynamic pools we are exploring discovery plugins that remove it entirely, all against the same `EndpointDiscovery` interface: orchestrator-native plugins (the `RayDiscovery`/`SlurmDiscovery` of pattern 4) that talk to Ray's Python API or Slurm's controller directly and emit `Upsert`/`Delete` events as workers change; plugins backed by a service registry such as Consul, etcd, or a cloud provider's service-discovery API where one already runs; and, longer term, moving the existing Kubernetes watch behind the same interface so `InferencePool` discovery becomes just another plugin and the scheduler carries no special case for any platform.

## One routing stack, every platform

> Because the discovery seam sits below the scheduler, file-discovery mode does not get a *subset* of llm-d - it gets the whole router, unchanged. KV-cache-utilization scoring, prefix-cache affinity, saturation-based admission, FlowControl, and the Prometheus metrics surface all behave exactly as they do on Kubernetes, because none of them ever learn where the endpoints came from. Crucially, this holds for capabilities that do not exist yet: any scoring, filtering, or flow-control logic added above the seam lands once and runs everywhere. There is no "Kubernetes llm-d" and "non-Kubernetes llm-d" to keep in sync - there is one routing stack, and it is platform-invariant by construction. That is the shape Figure 1 sketched at the top: one router underneath, every platform above.

Reviewer: suggest to use `interface` instead of `seam` since it is a more common term, wdyt?

Author: Fixed in b86d830 - switched to "interface" throughout the doc
